**Groff, Elizabeth R. ["Simulation for theory testing and experimentation"](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10940-006-9021-z): An example using routine activity theory and street robbery." Journal of Quantitative Criminology 23.2 (2007): 75-103.**

This paper presents a new approach to testing the routine activity theory. The routine activity theory is a criminology subfield developed by Marcus Felson and Lawrence E. Cohen. Routine activity theory is based on the premise that crime is committed regardless of social causes such as poverty, inequality, and unemployment. Some crimes that are well modelled by routine activity theory is copyright infringement, peer-to-peer file sharing, corporate crime, etc. The author of this paper, Elizabeth R. Groff, uses agent-based modelling to model street robbery since it involves the interaction of agents in a public place and is driven by economic gain, making it more of a rational decision than a crime such as assault. A wide variety of studies from surveys of individuals to macro and micro level data to represent routine activity in society. However, all of these studies struggled with separating constructs and accurately replicating crime patterns. Rather than the usual top-down approach, agent-based modelling is a bottom up approach that starts with individuals with characteristics and behavioural rules already implemented. This model introduces a new framework for more complete and rigourous tests of theories. It clearly supports the possibility of the basic premise of routine activity theory.
